One good reason for learning some command line basics is that instructions online will often favour the use of shell commands over a graphical interface. Where those instructions require changes to your machine that go beyond modifying a few files in your home directory, you’ll inevitably be faced with commands that need to be run as the machine’s administrator (or _superuser_ in Unix parlance). Before you start running arbitrary commands you find in some dark corner of the internet, it’s worth understanding the implications of running as an administrator, and how to spot those instructions that require it, so you can better gauge whether they’re safe to run or not.

The superuser is, as the name suggests, a user with super powers. In older systems it was a real user, with a real username (almost always “root”) that you could log in as if you had the password. As for those super powers: _root_ can modify or delete any file in any directory on the system, regardless of who owns them; _root_ can rewrite firewall rules or start network services that could potentially open the machine up to an attack; _root_ can shutdown the machine even if other people are still using it. In short, _root_ can do just about _anything_, skipping easily round the safeguards that are usually put in place to stop users from overstepping their bounds.

Of course a person logged in as root is just as capable of making mistakes as anyone else. The annals of computing history are filled with tales of a mistyped command deleting the entire file system or killing a vital server. Then there’s the possibility of a malicious attack: if a user is logged in as _root_ and leaves their desk then it’s not too tricky for a disgruntled colleague to hop on their machine and wreak havoc. Despite that, human nature being what it is, many administrators over the years have been guilty of using root as their main, or only, account.

## Don’t use the root account
If anyone asks you to enable the _root_ account, or log in as _root_, be very suspicious of their intentions

In an effort to reduce these problems many Linux distributions started to encourage the use of the `su` command. This is variously described as being short for ‘superuser’ or ‘switch user’, and allows you to change to another user on the machine without having to log out and in again. When used with no arguments it assumes you want to change to the root user (hence the first interpretation of the name), but you can pass a username to it in order to switch to a specific user account (the second interpretation). By encouraging use of `su` the aim was to persuade administrators to spend most of their time using a normal account, only switch to the superuser account when they needed to, and then use the `logout` command (or <kbd> Ctrl-D </kbd> shortcut) as soon as possible to return to their user-level account.

By minimising the amount of time spent logged in as _root_, the use of `su` reduces the window of opportunity in which to make a catastrophic mistake. Despite that, human nature being what it is, many administrators have been guilty of leaving long-running terminals open in which they’ve used `su` to switch to the _root_ account. In that respect `su` was only a small step forward for security.

## Don't use su
If anyone asks you to use `su`, be wary. If you’re using Ubuntu the _root_ account is disabled by default, so `su` with no parameters won’t work. But it’s still not worth taking the risk, in case the account has been enabled without you realizing. If you are asked to use `su` with a username then (if you have the password) you will have access to all the files of that user, and could accidentally delete or modify them.

When using `su` your entire terminal session is switched to the other user. Commands that don’t need root access, something as mundane as `pwd` or `ls`, would be run under the auspices of the superuser, increasing the risk of a bug in the program causing major problems. Worse still, if you lose track of which user you’re currently operating as, you might issue a command that is fairly benign when run as a user, but which could destroy the entire system if run as _root_.

Better to disable the _root_ account entirely and then, instead of allowing long-lived terminal sessions with dangerous powers, require the user to specifically request superuser rights on a per-command basis. The key to this approach is a command called `sudo` (as in “switch user and do this command”).

`sudo` is used to prefix a command that has to be run with superuser privileges. A configuration file is used to define which users can use `sudo`, and which commands they can run. When running a command like this, the user is prompted for _their own_ password, which is then cached for a period of time (defaulting to 15 minutes), so if they need to run multiple superuser-level commands they don’t keep getting continually asked to type it in.

<br/>
